um thank you for coming this afternoon
to the Irish Museum of Modern Art
it's with great Delight that
um we have here today via the modern
technology David Deutsch the acclaimed
Quantum physicist from the Department of
atomic and Laser physics at the center
of quantum computation at Oxford
University
and I will just kind of go through the
initial starters of how we got David
Deutsch kind of part of this
exhibition really and part of Felipe
Reno's kind of ideology of when we were
discussing the show
all Hawaiian entrees Luna reggae a
mouthful of a title there was a two-year
discussion with Philippe preno when we
were looking at Notions of reality and
Notions of how to redo the exhibition
format and we particularly were looking
at leading practitioners of thought of
artistic practice and of innovation and
how this all got started really was
Felipe and I were chatting through the
night about different things and Philip
said I've got this amazing book by This
brilliant writer sorry not too much of a
big um Standing Ovation for you there
David in a minute yeah
um but he just said there's this book
called the fabric of reality you should
read Rachel
um and it there's a quote from Michael
Faraday about the Optics of a candle and
but really it's David Deutsch's notion
of the fabric of reality and how that
interrelates to the universe and Beyond
because Philippe feels as an artist it's
really important to be like a tenant of
culture that you do interpret the
universe the surrounding kind of
stimulation by that the Notions of light
and the Notions of perception
so really I must say David it maybe is
this kind of Silent co-curator of this
exhibition too and because we couldn't
physically put David in the show would
it be nice yeah
we actually thought it would be really
kind of interesting to do your kind of a
continuation an organism which once the
show is up and running that it has a
sense of energy that we invite these
leading practice practitioners in to
kind of talk about their practice and
then that in its sense is part of the
show so the show has an ongoing energy
and its life is kind of kept stimulated
by the exhibition
now today
um David will be speaking with us today
um about this natural extension and
he'll be presenting his current research
entitled why are flowers beautiful
and this is from his forthcoming book
the beginning of infinity so if we could
all give a great
um kind of warm kind of um clap to David
and welcome him here today and I'm sure
his lecture will start so thank you very
much David
thank you
hi everybody and I want to thank the
museum for inviting me it was totally
unexpected
and in fact you may be wondering
uh how could a physicist like me have
anything possible to say about about
matters of Aesthetics
like like why are flowers beautiful
other than something like well I knows
what I likes
and funnily enough
the essence of what I have to say today
is
more or less that that I knows what I
like is not the essence of what
Aesthetics what aesthetic judgments are
about they are not or at least they need
not be expressions of someone's opinion
someone's arbitrary tastes or some
culturally determined values or some
genetic standards or biological
standards I'm going to say that there is
such a thing as aesthetic value
and that it is objective
independent of culture independent of
our personal preferences and tastes and
independent of our biological makeup
now why how have I come to that
conclusion well
let me give an analogy between between
science and art a scientist trying to
understand the world a bit better
does so by creating
theories
which are ideas about how the world
might actually be in reality and then
criticizes those theories and and tests
them against reality and with luck might
eventually maybe after many errors come
up with a theory that does meet the test
of describing reality better than the
best ideas that were known before
so the method is one of conjecture and
then of criticizing conjectures against
the standard of being true to reality
and also
um as the the physicist Richard Feynman
once remarked the only equipment that a
theoretical scientist needs is a pencil
a pad of paper and perhaps most
important a waste paper basket
and on the face of it now
many artists when they're at work
closely resemble what I've just
described about science in almost every
detail
a novelist for instance uses exactly the
same equipment the pencil the the pad of
paper or nowadays word processor
and for instance in music composers like
Beethoven were notorious for agonizing
through change after change after change
seeking something that they knew was
there to be found a standard that was
there to be met
and which could be successfully met only
with a great deal of creative effort and
with a great deal of
error that is a great deal of stuff
going into the wastebasket
of course
in science and in art they're all there
are also exceptions to this at least
apparent exceptions uh the discoveries
which are made with a single flash of
insight and and say a composer like
Mozart who allegedly just created music
by just writing it down we have to
suspect though
that in all such cases
the the effort and the successive
improvements
were actually there but concealed inside
the brain of the Creator so really there
was an internal waste basket
I'll just turn the sound down a little
because we're getting a bit of an echo
here
okay
um so uh scientific discovery
and artistic creation can look alike
is this just a superficial resemblance
is is Beethoven fooling himself when he
thinks that he's reaching for something
that's actually real
something that's there for him to
achieve or to fail to achieve is he
fooling himself when he thinks that the
sheets that are in the wastebasket
contain actual mistakes that they are
actually worse than the sheets that he
ends up publishing and also is he
fooling himself when he thinks that by
struggling to create an entire new style
of music a whole new standard by which
music is to be judged
that the standard he's creating is
actually better
than the old one is it all just
self-referential is he just
really exploring the randomness of his
own DNA
or
is there a real meaning to saying
that the music of a Beethoven or Mozart
is better
than that of their Stone Age ancestors
knocking together bits of
Mastodon bone
and also that the criteria that Mozart
and Beethoven were trying to meet were
better than those that the Stone Age
people were trying to meet
was there no such thing as better
is there only I knows what I likes or
what tradition or genetics or authority
designate as good
I'm going to argue that there is such a
thing as better and worse
in art such a thing as objective Beauty
the particular focus of my work in
physics has been on the foundations of
physics and it's in the nature of
foundations that the foundations of one
field are also the foundations of others
that's where unifications between Fields
come from
I'm not talking about ultimate
foundations here I I don't think there's
there's an ultimate Foundation to
knowledge something which everything
that's true can be derived from that's
actually an irrational notion because if
that were true then there'd be no answer
to the to the to the problem why that
foundation and not another
and I believe that problems are in fact
soluble that there's always a rational
answer to be discovered
and never a supernatural barrier to
understanding saying
you can understand this far but no
further
in reaching the truth and and the way
that we reach many truths is by
understanding things more deeply and
thereby
more broadly that that's the nature of
the concept of a foundation
so
ultimately understanding more and more
necessarily entails unifications
for example
just as in
architecture
all all buildings all ultimately stand
on the same literal Foundation
namely the Earth
that is until the first moon base is
built at any rate
so all buildings even the moon base
stand on the same theoretical Foundation
namely the laws of physics and the laws
of engineering and
architecture
and so
architecture therefore ultimately shares
the same foundations via physics with
such apparently very distant Fields as
pharmacology let's say which which is
indirectly based on physics via
biochemistry and chemistry
so these two very disparate distant
Fields it can share a common Foundation
but then
architecture also involves Aesthetics
does Aesthetics similarly have a
foundation that it shares with other
fields
well
what is aesthetic what is beauty
certainly some things can
seem to us to be beautiful and some to
be ugly or boring and one thing we can
say immediately is that beauty
is not a matter of content but of form
so for instance here's
a boring picture
and
here is one with essentially the same
content and yet this one has some
non-zero aesthetic value
you can see that it's likely that
someone thought about this one
but not necessarily the previous one
specifically you can tell
that someone thought about what it would
take to improve this one aesthetically
to make it more beautiful
now there are also
subjective Sensations associated with
beauty is what philosophers call these
these subjective Sensations qualia so
the qualia of Beauty in this case
fortunately that need not concern us
here today because it will be entirely
unnecessary for me to Define what beauty
is that's lucky because I don't know
but I I'll only need to consider what
is in a certain sense that I will
explain what is attractive what
experiences people might work to obtain
more of
so if you see a work of art that you
appreciate what that means is that
you're willing to work to to dwell on it
to give it more of your attention in
order to appreciate more in it
and what you're appreciating in it is
what you think is beautiful
more centrally to this point if you're
an artist and halfway through the
creative process you see something in
your unfinished creation that you want
to work to bring out more of
then if you're right that's Beauty
so Beauty in this sense
is a form of attractiveness but that
can't be all there is to it because not
all attractiveness has anything to do
with Aesthetics at all you lose your
balance and you fall off a log and
that's just because we're all attracted
to the planet Earth now that that may
just seem like a play on the word
attraction
because our attraction to the Earth
isn't due to any kind of aesthetic
appreciation of the earth it's just a
physical Force
it affects artists no more than it
affects aardvarks
but
but bear with me because
there are other ways in which the laws
of physics can make us attracted to
something
for example
and an animal can be attracted to
another animal in order to mate with it
or to eat it
and once the Predator has taken a bite
it's attracted to take another unless
the bite tastes funny
in which case the animal will be
repelled so there is a matter of taste
but that matter of taste is caused by a
physical force not direct physical Force
but nevertheless the laws of physics in
the in the form of the laws of chemistry
and biochemistry
and you can just Trace how the presence
of a particular chemical causes the
behavior of an animal
being attracted or repelled by something
so there's still no aesthetic in that
animal's behavior no objective Beauty
there being appreciated by anyone or
anything it's just chemicals having
chemical effects
and by the way here's here's another
form of Attraction a red traffic light a
red traffic light can induce us to stop
and stare at it
as long as it's red
but that's not artistic appreciation of
the red light either even though it's an
attraction because it's mechanical
but if we were to exclude all
attractions caused by the laws of
physics in any way from being counted as
as objectively aesthetic then we'd be on
a very short slippery slope to excluding
absolutely everything because the laws
of physics cause everything if analyzed
in sufficient detail everything is
mechanical
so it could be said so
could one draw the conclusion that
beauty can't possibly be objective
because our attractions to anything at
all are just caused by the laws of
physics
no not at all that that would be invalid
because
by the same argument science itself
wouldn't be objective
mathematics and even pure logic wouldn't
be objective because nothing would
because
what a scientist or a mathematician or a
logician want to say is equally caused
by the chemicals that the physical and
chemical composition of their brain or
as the probabilities are determined it
makes no difference to the current
argument
but it's a bad argument because it
confuses prediction
on the one hand that's what the laws of
physics do with explanation
which is a deeper thing although the
physics the laws of physics in principle
predict what a mathematician would say
if one could do the impossible
calculation of working out how his brain
will behave but you can't explain
what a good mathematician does without
referring to the objective truths of
mathematics not just the physics of the
mathematician's brain but
truths about abstract objects that the a
mathematician is studying that the
mathematician can end up saying the
words there is no largest prime number
and the real explanation of of the
mathematician saying that is that there
really isn't a largest prime number
somehow the mathematician
may think that he's a beetroot and and
because he's crazy
and
he's subjectively thinks that but in his
case
unlike the previous case there is no
objective explanation for his opinion
other than the physical state of his
brain
so the one that's discovering real
mathematics the explanation goes outside
to something objective
so
um
the the difference between sane and
crazy and also the difference between
objective and purely subjective and the
difference between creating something
real and not is where the explanation
for what's happening is located
something's objective if it appears in
true explanations of the world not just
explanations of the mind of the person
who believes it
and the predictive power of physical the
laws of physics is not at all relevant
here because you can't the laws of
physics can't predict what laws of
physics are going to be discovered next
year
because if you could you'd you'd have
discovered them this year
that is because the discovery of genuine
objective knowledge is invariably
creative
you can't predict new works of art
either a new work of art
like a newly discovered mathematical
theorem or law of nature
brings something
genuinely new into the world
it adds something
and in exactly the same way a viewer of
Art
has to create a new understanding in
order to appreciate that art
people often
wax lyrical about the alleged
achievements of of primitive cultures
like for instance that of ancient Easter
Island
with its 60 ton statues
but
the philosopher Jacob bronowsky who is
one of my heroes by the way dared to
disagree with this consensus he said
the critical question about these
statues is
why were they all made alike
and he asked that question because
repetition
is not art merely copying a work of art
is not a creative act
so these statues are not art they are
as bronowsky said like frames in a film
that is running down
what he meant was that
in the culture that made those statues
no progress was being made artistic or
any other kind and successive statues of
that dead culture were no more works of
art than successive frames of a film of
one Statue would be works of art
now to say that art is not empty
repetition and of course nor is science
is to say that there is something
inherently unpredictable about
creativity because anything that's
predictable is necessarily repeating
some defining attribute of it
but I have to stress because this is
very often misunderstood that
unpredictable doesn't mean random at all
in in fact in this case it means almost
exactly the opposite of random there's
nothing random about what we discover
about the laws of physics even though
that Discovery is unpredictable in
advance
likewise the unpredictability and the
creativity of art does not make it
random or in any way arbitrary either
that creativity
and that novelty are what is missing in
all the examples I've given so far of
what is not objective Beauty
the attraction of a falling to Earth or
the the fascination of watching a red
traffic light
or the attraction of an animal to its
prey none of those are objective it's
seeking objective Beauty
now
does anything seek objective Beauty well
a big clue that there is genuine
creativity and and genuine novelty in
some human tastes and some human
activities just as there is in
scientific knowledge
the clue that we're not just obeying our
genes
is that we can act in ways which are
manifestly contrary to any tastes and
preferences that might have been built
into our genes
we regularly eat and drink things in
order to obtain tastes which have
evolved which evolved originally
in order to repel us for instance
and which our taste evolved to be
repelled by for instance the taste of of
fermenting grains
and one can learn and decide to be
attracted by those
a similar example is that spices
many of them evolved for millions of
years in order to have a taste that
animals didn't like
and yet we learn to like to taste them
another example is we have an inborn
aversion to Heights to to to falling off
Heights even babies apparently have this
inborn version and animals certainly do
and yet human beings
regularly go parachuting
for sport not in spite of this inborn
feeling of aversion but precisely
because of it it's the very feeling of
inborn fear and aversion to Heights that
a human being can interpret as part of a
whole
into a bigger picture which to them is
attractive which which to them is
beautiful
they want more of it in order to
appreciate it more deeply
so
the ingredients of that attraction
are not inborn
they're not culturally imposed
just as the contents of a newly
discovered law Lord physics are not
culturally imposed
they are instead reaching towards
something
that seems to us
subjectively to be objective
that is to say we see it as having an
attribute of beauty and
I have to add I suppose this is obvious
but but even in physics and in
mathematics
the attraction of doing those subjects
which is the reason that they're done
is ultimately aesthetic we're pursuing
truth
our Criterion is truth
but we wouldn't pursue it or even
recognize it without its beauty
now I think that that Keats was was
being ironic or something in that poem
where he said the truth actually is
beauty it certainly isn't any more than
physics is mathematics or cats are dogs
but Beauty and scientific truth have
something vital in common
namely their objectivity
and what's more they are related a world
without Aesthetics wouldn't be
comprehensible scientifically
and a world that wasn't explicable in
the scientific sense
couldn't provide the anchor in reality
that objectively good art requires
so therefore if if beauty is objective
then it is indeed a form of truth
because it is then objectively true or
false that something or other is or
isn't beautiful or more beautiful than
something else
it's objectively
true or false that
one page in the waste paper basket has
less value or more value than the page
that eventually gets published
so okay so we pursue truth and beauty
and they're connected in various ways
but but we can be fooled we might see a
pretty face as beautiful because of the
values and standards built into our
genes and into our culture and a praying
mantis might see this as beautiful
so might some humans entomologists for
instance
in fact
there's almost nothing that a human
can't learn to see as beautiful
so you might take that as evidence that
beauty can't be objective but no because
humans can learn to see false scientific
theories as as true as well they can
learn to see false logic as true
nevertheless there is an objective truth
accessible to science
however
what about this
why is this flower the shape it is
well the immediate answer is because its
genes evolved over millions of years to
make it attractive to Insects so
insects find this attractive
why do they find it attractive
well on the face of it it's for exactly
the same reason as they find insects of
the opposite sex attractive
flowers are the shape they are because
they attract insects and insects are
attracted by flowers because that's how
they get food nectar
and the the way this situation arose is
that there was co-evolution between
genes in the flower and genes in the
insect just as there is co-evolution
between males and females of the same
species
so there was a co-evolution of criteria
for what insects find attractive
and means of meeting the criteria which
is how to make the shapes and patterns
and the colors of flowers
it's not surprising that flowers contain
knowledge of how to attract insects
and insects contain the desire to get
closer to flowers with certain shapes
and patterns
to experience more of a particular shape
and pattern than of others
that's not surprising but what is
surprising
is that these same flowers also attract
humans
now this is a very familiar fact to us
so we don't see how amazing it is just
look at this rather repulsive animal
and while you're at it think
of all the countless different
repulsively ugly animals that there are
in nature and think
every one of them is naturally
found attractive by members of the
opposite sex in that species and also by
their predators and therefore it's it's
to be expected that we
find most of them repulsive unless we're
zoologists or something
and by the way with
with the predators and prey that there's
a similar co-evolution but the other way
around it's it's a competitive
co-evolution with the Predator's genes
evolving to make the right prey look
more attractive to it and with the
praise genes evolving to make the to
become less attractive to the predator
and that's how camouflage happens
and therefore it seems plausible for
that reason that the opposite of
beautiful is not actually
ugly but rather boring like the
camouflaged animal because
ugly is distinctive
and so is only a matter of a
reinterpretation away from beauty
as any zoologist in the audience would
no doubt tell us and and probably any
chefs as well
anyway
um it can happen that the local internal
criteria that evolve within a species
happen to be
produced something that's attractive to
us as well for instance the peacock's
tale is an example
that's a rare anomaly produced by a run
of a runaway arms race in the in the uh
co-evolution between male and female
peacocks
but in the overwhelming majority of
species we don't share any of that
species criteria for finding something
attractive but with flowers
Most flowers
we do
sometimes a tree can be beautiful
even over and above the cultural
connotations that trees have even a
puddle of water can can be beautiful but
only sometimes again such cases are rare
anomalies with flowers it's reliable
so why do we find flowers beautiful
that's the title of my talk well
perhaps the obvious answer which I'm
going to oppose is that it's not
that flowers are objectively beautiful
but that it's merely a cultural
phenomenon
but I don't think that holds water
because we find flowers beautiful that
we've never seen before and which
haven't been known to our culture before
and quite reliably most people most
cultures
just think that that the same is not at
all true of the roots of a flower of a
plant
nor the leaves
Just Flowers so I I think there can be
only one possible answer overall
uh that that flowers are beautiful
because
the task that was faced
in their co-evolution with insects
was essentially one of signaling complex
information
across a gap between the species
species that have nothing else in common
so there's no shared genetic propensity
existing before the evolution began
nothing like for instance even being
able to recognize a fellow member of the
same species which is needed for other
reasons
before determining their attractiveness
and perhaps most important there are in
the case of the flowers and insects
there are no
shared existing genes
for appearance and for criteria to to of
attractiveness that were inherited from
the ancestor species
from which that species evolved and that
such genes would only need to be
modified a little
um for in order to work in the new
species but across the gap between
distant unrelated species
they're starting from scratch and
therefore my guess is and this is my
central thesis today
that the easiest way to Signal across
such a gap is to use objective standards
of beauty
not the species-specific subjective
standards that are usually sufficient in
the evolution of species
and so flowers have to be appealing by
objective standards and insects have to
be able to recognize some objective
standards insects recognize no other
objective standards of anything
very few other species are attracted by
flowers
only the species that evolved to do it
and human beings
and why just humans
there's a very important reason it's
because
signaling across the gap between two
humans
is analogous to signaling across the gap
between two entire species a human being
in terms of knowledge content
and creative individuality is rather
like an entire species of any other
animal
it's an entire world unto itself unlike
other animals where all the animals of a
particular species have the same
programming and therefore use the same
criteria
for what to be attracted by humans are
quite unlike that
the amount of information in one human
mind is greater than that in the entire
Genome of any animal
and overwhelmingly more than the genetic
information that's unique to one person
so that means that human artists
and scientists are trying to Signal
across the same scale of Gap
as there exists between the flowers and
the insects
now another possible objection to this
theory is is to say yes okay some some
of what humans find attractive in
flowers or in art
is indeed objective but it is not
objective Beauty it's something more
mundane something like a liking for
bright colors or for strong contrasts or
symmetrical shapes
maybe humans have an inborn liking for
symmetry because it helps us to classify
and order things and so organize our
environment physically and conceptually
which is what we evolve to do
yes we we almost certainly do have that
sort of genetic trait but I think it's
got nothing to do with why flowers are
beautiful because for instance some
flowers are white for a start
at least they may be colored in colors
that some insects can see but we can't
but but they're white to us and we still
find them beautiful
as for the contrast with the background
well yes all flowers contrast with their
background they couldn't possibly
perform us their signaling function if
they didn't do that
but
a big hairy spider in the bath contrasts
with its background even more and yet
there's no General consensus that that
is beautiful
as for symmetry
well yes again we like symmetry but
spiders are quite symmetrical
and some flowers
are very unsymmetrical
and we don't find them any less
attractive for that
now the mirror image of that set of
objections is another objection namely
that we we also find certain other
things in nature beautiful things which
are are not the results of
any artistic creativity or co-evolution
across a gap things like the night sky
or waterfalls
or sunsets
but I think that that objection doesn't
doesn't bear much closer inspection not
every sunset is beautiful they're not
all as beautiful as say this
in fact not every photograph of even
this Sunset was as beautiful
if you were to look at the other
photographs taken of this sunset by this
photographer
you would find maybe dozens of others
and and all of them less good than this
one because this is the one that the the
photographer chose to show
and even this one could easily be
improved aesthetically
what's more
the photographer didn't take a picture
of a sunset at random or the sky at
random nor with a random foreground not
randomly framed and composed and so on
so many creative decisions went into
this Photograph without them
the image would have been far less
beautiful if at all
now that's far less true of this picture
its attractiveness
doesn't depend on a foreground it
depends far less on composition and so
on
and so with the sunset it's really the
point of view the photograph that's
beautiful with the flowers it's each
flower
though undoubtedly they can be made more
beautiful by the creativity of an artist
such as a photographer
or a flower arranger
so I think that the only possible
explanation of all these different
instances that I've given of
X finding Y beautiful or X not finding Y
beautiful or being attracted or not
being attracted and so on at least the
most plausible explanation of all the
examples taken together
I think is that
first of all
there do exist subjective standards of
of beauty which are essentially
dumb animal species specific standards
of attractiveness or in the case of
humans there's also culture specific and
individual specific standards but
subjective
and second there are also objective
standards that have nothing to do with
species nothing to do with Biology
nothing to do with culture or individual
preferences they are as objective as the
laws of physics or the laws of
mathematics
so
Aesthetics
is objective and that tells us that when
an artist creates a work of art they
really are engaging in the kind of
thinking that
goes into creating new knowledge in
science and in mathematics and in
philosophy namely conjectures and
criticisms against improving standards
where by improving we mean objectively
improving
artists have
authentically artistic problems
authentically aesthetic problems
and
they try to solve them by conjecture and
by improving both the works of art and
the criteria
just like Beethoven if an artist the
painting isn't right you try to change
it you try to you you improve it you and
you also change the criteria by which
you're judging it
and then you try to meet those criteria
and you find that you meet them
imperfectly
and so you improve your guess as to what
will meet them and also what they really
should be
and eventually
if you're an artist and if you're right
then you end up with a work of art of
objective value
now I said authentically artistic
problems but there are two kinds of
those that they're pure and applied
rather like in mathematics or in science
there's there's pure as pure science
such as physics and an applied related
science such as engineering same is true
in art
there's the applied kind of of artistic
problem that's that's the one that's
faced by the flowers and insects where
they have what's actually just a
practical problem but it happens to be
best solved because of the logic of the
situation it's best solved by creating
objective Beauty rather than just
subjective standards of attractiveness
and humans have those kind of problems
too the the beauty of for instance
the Macintosh user interface was created
essentially to promote design efficiency
and the the purpose the the beauty of a
poem or a song may in some cases
be a practical uh the purpose may be
practical to to uh give cohesiveness to
a culture or to advance a certain
political agenda or even to sell washing
up liquid
this purpose purposes of that kind can
be served either by creating objective
beauty or just by creating subjective
beauty that appeals to the relatively
immutable
dumb standards of genetic predisposition
and the static
non-creative parts of culture
and then there's the other kind of
problem the pure kind which which
doesn't have any analog in biological
evolution that is of creating Beauty for
its own sake and of advancing cultural
standards cultural aesthetic standards
accordingly
that is the analog of pure scientific
research of Blue Sky research
and as I've explained the State of Mind
involved in this sort of Science and
this sort of art is fundamentally the
same both are seeking what can perfectly
justly be called objective truth
by the way
um one amusing corollary of of this
theory is I think that
it's very likely
that human appearance as selected for by
human sexual selection
or at least at least the things about
human faces and bodies that we find
beautiful or attractive in the sense of
wanting to look at them
at least in part sat must satisfy
standards of objective Beauty as well as
species-specific and cultural ones
it's just that we're not very far along
that path yet because we only diverge
from apes a few hundred thousand years
ago so our appearance isn't yet all that
different from apes but I would predict
that once we understand better
what objective Aesthetics actually is
we will find that the differences in
appearance between us and apes are all
in the direction of making humans
objectively more beautiful than Apes
we can't tell just by looking
the same is true in science we can't
tell the difference subjectively between
the motion of an airplane that we see
going across the sky which is objective
motion
and the motion of the sun across the sky
which is purely subjective purely
subjective illusion caused by our own
motion
and then there's things halfway between
like the motion of the Moon which is a
little bit of each
so we can't tell
just by appreciating a bit of beauty
whether it is subjective or objective
any more than we can in science but
the future
objective study of Aesthetics
might give us ways of telling the
difference
well
why should we bother to do that
why not just go by who knows what we
likes and and never mind the underlying
reason
because after all I've just said they
feel exactly the same
because the reason the reason we should
bother
is that
the objective Direction the direction of
objective Improvement is the only one in
which we can expect to make unlimited
progress as we can in Science and
Mathematics and philosophy
all the other directions
the subjective ones
are inherently finite because they are
circumscribed by the finite knowledge
inherent in our genes and in existing
traditions
that tells us something about various
theories that are going around or have
gone around about what art really is
um
Ancient Art that's objectively valuable
such as that of say ancient Greece and
its Revival in the Renaissance
first concerned themselves with things
like the skill of reproducing the exact
appearance of a face or a human body or
of a perspective
but that kind of skill though it is an
objective skill and although it
facilitates real objective art is not in
itself artistic
precisely because it is perfectable
real art
is capable of going on from there and
doing something Beyond
the Perfection of Any Given skill and
and that's what the great artists of the
Renaissance actually did
also
this idea of objective beauty that I
mean that I've been explaining also I
think explains the conventional wisdom
which I think is true that artistic
appreciation can be more or less refined
that is to say there exists a
sophisticated appreciation which is
better
than a crude appreciation that a gourmet
has a better
life than someone who just appreciates
steak and chips
it also tells us that
the theory that art is there to improve
humankind
well it does have a grain of Truth in
that now we we see that improving
artistic values and artistic achievement
is itself an objective Improvement and
art like science can contribute to
improving humankind also in
non-aesthetic ways like like morally and
politically and whatever
but that is not what Art and Science
actually are
and that's not what artistic and
scientific values actually are because
you don't have a choice as to what is or
isn't an artistic Improvement any more
than you have a choice as to what's true
and false in mathematics and if you do
try to tune your your theorems or your
scientific theories or your
philosophical positions to meet a
predetermined political agenda say or a
predetermined personal preference
then you will automatically be at Cross
purposes with yourself even if you
achieve it
you you may have advanced your cause
but you won't have advanced
science philosophy or in the case of art
you won't have advanced art
again the same critique also tells us
that the theories of art that say that
art is about self-expression
must be wrong too because
expression
is about how to convey something that is
already there
and objectively valuable art is about
creating something new that was not
there before
also
self-expression is by definition
expressing something subjective
while art
is inherently objective
similarly
any kind of art that that consists of
spontaneous Acts
like like throwing paint onto canvas or
pickling sheep or or and so on
is unlikely to constitute artistic
progress objectively
now if I'm right in this whole picture
of the relationship of art to knowledge
the the the reality of artistic
standards the relationship of Art and
Science and all if I'm right about all
that then
one nice implication is that the future
of art is absolutely mind-boggling
art of the future it follows
can create unlimited increases in Beauty
this may seem Fantastical but we we've
got quite used to assuming the same
thing is true about technology which
would have seemed impossible during most
of human history
I can only speculate but
we can also presumably expect new kinds
of unification for instance
I've said that Elegance which is a kind
of beauty
is is implicated in scientific and
mathematical discovery
well when we understand one day when we
better understand what Elegance actually
is
then perhaps we will find new and better
ways to seek truth
using elegance and beauty
and quite likely also we'll be able to
design after all our senses are
subjective and parochial in that they
they all evolved for
subjective local reasons to do without
the the history of our species quite
likely we can once we understand better
what beauty really is we can design new
senses new qualia that can Encompass
beauty of new kinds which are literally
inconceivable to us now
what is it like to be a bat
that that's to be a bat which has which
has
um echolocation instead of sight as its
main sense well that's a famous question
in the philosophy of Consciousness
perhaps in future
that will not so much be the task of
philosophy to discover
but the task of Art
new technological art to give us the
experience of
so that that's it thank you very much
[Applause]
thank you very much David gosh that was
absolutely brilliant I have one question
thank you question myself before we open
to the floor
um this is just on a personal note you
you talked about the Notions of Beauty
with regards to the the flowers like why
are flowers beautiful and I was thinking
that notion of beauty linking back to
someone like schopenhauer lucretius it's
had to do with Notions of Cruelty so why
flowers are beautiful are actually quite
cruel no concept the notion of survival
with nature
yes there's some truth in that because
um I said that beauty and ugliness are
only a matter of interpretation away
from each other whereas Beauty and
boredom are not there is a much bigger
Gap there however
I don't think it's true that evolution
is inherently
savage or ugly I mean that is true of
biological evolution of of animals and
it's certainly true of the of the
flowers and the insects which don't
necessarily benefit each other with this
signaling but humans have a choice to to
create Beauty in other ways which aren't
cruel and so our progress and and
progress presumably
is always human progress is always more
creative than destructive so we can
eventually hope to make to to find we
well we can eventually hope that the
objective standards of beauty will not
be destructive
thank you I'm going to open out to the
floor does anybody have any questions
don't be shy
it seems to me that nature sometimes
gets it wrong and flowers can be very
very kitch not so beautiful they're over
the top so that and I I would imagine
that that you couldn't get anyone to
agree on uh
the beauty value across the spectrum of
flowers so
I don't see it yes it I I agree but I
don't think that's an objection to this
viewer because exactly the same thing is
true in in science uh you know there's
there's uh there's the famous poem which
which the philosopher Carl Poppa quotes
uh two plus two is four which is true
but two empty and two trite I would
rather seek a clue to some matters not
so light
and that is saying that
although
uh
there's no dispute about whether two
plus two is four is true or not there is
a dispute about what kinds of Truth we
ought to be seeking
and the difference between Kitsch and
deeply beautiful is something that we
can't expect to always agree on
when we're making a lot of progress we
can create more agreement about this and
again exactly the same thing happens in
science and in mathematics and
philosophy
so
um you know the the difference between a
catch flower and a beautiful flower is
perhaps not that great by the standards
of what humans can achieve in terms of
beauty but then I'm not saying that the
flowers are that great by human
standards the mystery is
why do we appreciate flowers at all when
we don't appreciate almost anything else
in nature that has evolved to be
attractive I answered your question
piece didn't it
I mean no do you want more
anything else
well yes I'm saying that the other
things that we appreciate in nature
are either a coincidence like the
peacock's tale where where we can see
that the vast majority of things that
evolved for those kinds of reasons are
not attractive to us or things like the
night sky and that sort of thing that
they are beautiful because of their
cultural connotations if you were to
take a take just a piece of paper and
put dots on it in the pit in the places
where stars are then people wouldn't be
very awed by looking at that picture
they are all by the night sky for
cultural reasons so that there are all
sorts of reasons that we subjectively
find things including things in nature
beautiful but some of them are cultural
some of them are in our genes but you
can't explain the flowers that way
I've done that
No in fact how about
um Crystal structures which I think all
of us find I'm extremely attractive and
can also in fact in fact and in all of
their structures kind of in fact Crystal
structures all across
in fact the possibility of
yes
um I did mention that we almost
certainly have an inborn appreciation of
symmetry
and crystals explore
all the different kinds of symmetry that
can exist in three-dimensional shapes
and uh the if if you have a crystal
though if you have a a rock that doesn't
display
uh symmetry then it is very rare for it
to be beautiful at least not by
consensus
I should also add that that a crystal
Garden or something like that is more
beautiful than original than an
individual Crystal unless the crystal
has cultural connotations like a famous
diamond or whatever in that case those
may help us to find it to to find it
beautiful but again the the with the
flowers it's different the unsymmetrical
ones are no less beautiful than the
symmetrical ones to the Gen out General
appreciation unlike crystals
okay so one last question please I think
we had one up there
the whole talk has been fascinating and
cool thank you
and in general I'm wondering because of
the way the world is changing because of
Technology uh because of I suppose our
Collective Consciousness and individual
Consciousness will our Notions of beauty
change do you think does that is that
something that you consider or think
about if if I'm right at all then that
is bound to happen
um uh not only our Notions of beauty we
I think our Notions of beauty probably
have changed over a period of centuries
anyway I mean if you look at uh let's
say how how which people are regarded as
beautiful in in say the Renaissance
they're not quite the same features as
we would regard as beautiful today and
it's also different in different
cultures even even currently
uh but but
um I one would expect if this whole
picture is true one would expect
standards of Beauty and also different
kinds of beauty to change rapidly once
art has the same attitude towards
creating knowledge as science
mathematics and philosophy do and I
suppose that's what I'm calling for can
I ask you something in relation to that
the role of Arts especially in line with
artists such as Giotto was to support
religion and therefore can religion was
there but art was a kind of
gesticulation of the word of God do you
feel that maybe in the future that art
replaces religion that doesn't support
religion actually has its own concept
within that
well like I said anything that art
supports I mean this is a legitimate
role for art like for science to support
things
physics is used to build Bridges but
that's not what physics is
physics is an understanding of the
objective world and similarly art can be
used to support all sorts of things and
I think it's great that art is used to
support
washing up Liquid sales but but that's
not what art is either
so uh Giotto and and and the conception
of art as supporting religion is
inherently finite and therefore
inherently not objectively artistic
a thing like that runs out and has to
eventually be replaced by pursuing art
for its own sake
and yes art could replace religion I
mean science could replace it in in
general
open-ended creation can replace religion
and other closed systems
I just wanted to ask you do you think
that um a new standard of objective
Beauty would be like
um a signpost to Consciousness or do you
think that you need to be a conscious
Observer to see objective Beauty which
you think comes first
Ah that's a that's a great question
um I don't know is is the answer I said
at the beginning today that I won't have
to actually say what beauty is the the
quality of beauty
um it could be that understanding how
Beauty works and understanding how to
create it and so on better would help us
to understand the qualia of Beauty in
which case it would definitely
um uh tell us something about
Consciousness but just because you have
to be conscious to appreciate beauty
doesn't mean that once we understand
Beauty we understand Consciousness you
have to be you have to be conscious to
create knowledge
and yet we've created a vast amount of
knowledge in Science and Mathematics and
so on without ever understanding what
Consciousness is
so it may help or it may not
well David
um thank you very very much on behalf of
the Irish Museum of Modern Arts a
brilliant talk today so thank you very
very much thank you
great audience thanks for coming
um just to tell everybody that Luna
reggae continues until the 18th and we
also have two shows opening Alex Katz
and Thomas demand and that's coming so
do look into our program for that thank
you very much thank you
David thanks
thank you
bye everyone hi David we'll be in touch
as well